Treat position bias via GAM in LambdaMART (#5929)
microsoft/LightGBM: docs/Advanced-Topics.rst

--------------------------------------------

-  Refer to `gcc Tips <./gcc-Tips.rst>`__.

> Support for Position Bias Treatment
> --------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for Position Bias Treatment
------------------------------------
```

Please align this header to the length of the text.

Often the relevance labels provided in Learning-to-Rank taks might be derived from implicit user feedback (e.g., clicks) and therefore might be biased due to their position on the screen when having been presented to a user. LightGBM uses an additional file to store positional data, like the following:

::

    3
    4
    1
    ...

> It means the position of the document from the first data row, when presented to a user, was ``3``, second was ``4``, and so on. A position could be any (arbitrary) integer number and could encode the presentation of an item even in complex layouts (it is up to the LightGBM user to perform such encoding/enumeration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It means the document from the first data row was the third presented to a user, the document from the second row was the fourth presented to the user, and so on. A position could be any (arbitrary) integer number and could encode the presentation of an item even in complex layouts (it is up to the LightGBM user to perform such encoding/enumeration).
```

Is this index 0-based (first position = `0`) or 1-based (first position = `1`)? Can you please clarify that?

Author: @jameslamb, the positions don't necessarily have to be ordinal or coming from a contiguous range. So if we require them to be integers (not strings), they could be any integer (I guess even negative). As such, there may not necessarily exist entities defined as "first position" or "second position" (e.g., in complex layouts).

The position file corresponds with training data file line by line, and has one position per line.

> And if the name of training data file is ``train.txt``, the position file should be named as ``train.txt.position`` and placed in the same folder as the data file.

Reviewer: @metpavel @shiyu1994 why are we keeping this restriction? I think it's quite limiting, unnecessarily.

I thought that in https://github.com/microsoft/LightGBM/pull/5929/files#r1257685144, we'd agreed to instead provide a path to a file through user-provided configuration in `params`.

Reviewer 2: Done via 
102fb97

Reviewer 2: Update document in Advanced Topics to remove this constraint via [757f7cb](https://github.com/microsoft/LightGBM/pull/5929/commits/757f7cb5b19134394d47dec792b29cfb3b225223)

In this case, LightGBM will load the position file automatically if it exists.

> Also, you can include position column in your data file. Please refer to the ``position_column`` `parameter <#position_column>`__ in above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, you can include position column in your data file. Please refer to the ``position_column`` `parameter <#position_column>`__.
```

You haven't added a `position_column` parameter yet.

<img width="516" alt="image" src="https://github.com/microsoft/LightGBM/assets/7608904/b829eeb4-d4a1-44a7-9559-03695d7502b8">

And its docs also would not be "above", but on the separate parameters page.

> Currently, implemented is an approach to model position bias by using an idea of Generalized Additive Models (`GAM <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_additive_model>`_) to linearly decompose the document score ``s`` into the sum of a relevance component ``f`` and a positional component ``g``:  ``s(x, pos) = f(x) + g(pos)`` where the former component depends on the original query-document features and the latter depends on the position of an item. During the training, the compound scoring function ``s(x, pos)`` is fit with a standard ranking algorithm (e.g., LambdaMART) which boils down to jointly learning the relevance component ``f(x)`` (it is later returned as an unbiased model) and the position factors ``g(pos)`` that help better explain the observed (biased) labels. Similar score decomposition ideas have previously been applied for classification & pointwise ranking tasks with assumptions of binary labels and binary relevance (a.k.a. "two-tower" models, refer to the papers: `Towards Disentangling Relevance and Bias in Unbiased Learning to Rank <https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13937>`_, `PAL: a position-bias aware learning framework for CTR prediction in live recommender systems <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3298689.3347033>`_, `A General Framework for Debiasing in CTR Prediction <https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.02767>`_). In LightGBM, we adapt this idea to general pairwise Lerarning-to-Rank with arbitrary ordinal relevance labels. Besides, GAMs have been used in the context of explainable ML (`Accurate Intelligible Models with Pairwise Interactions <https://www.cs.cornell.edu/~yinlou/papers/lou-kdd13.pdf>`_) to linearly decompose the contribution of each feature (and possibly their pairwise interactions) to the overall score, for subsequent analysis and interpretation of their effects in the trained models.

Reviewer: For every line in this file, and especially this line, please break them up into one sentence per line.

Consecutive lines not separated by a blank line will be correctly combined back together into a paragraph with wrapping, so the visual appearance will be identical.

But having each sentence on its own line makes it easier to review changes to the doc, and makes the git blame view more useful as a source of "when was this last changed, why, and by who?".

--------------------------------------------

-  Refer to `gcc Tips <./gcc-Tips.rst>`__.

Support for Position Bias Treatment
------------------------------------

Often the relevance labels provided in Learning-to-Rank tasks might be derived from implicit user feedback (e.g., clicks) and therefore might be biased due to their position/location on the screen when having been presented to a user.

> LightGBM can make use of positional data, for example provided in an additional file like the following:
> 
> ::
> 
>     3
>     4
>     1
>     ...
> 
> It means the position of the document from the first data row, when presented to a user, was encoded as ``3``, second was encoded as ``4``, and so on. 
> A position could be any arbitrary integer number (not necessarily from a contiguous range) and could encode the presentation of an item even in complex layouts like 2D or consisting of several verticals (it is up to the LightGBM user to perform such encoding/mapping into integers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LightGBM can make use of positional data.

For example, consider the case where you expect that the first 3 results from a search engine will be visible in users' browsers without scrolling, and all other results for a query would require scrolling.

LightGBM could be told to account for the position bias from results being "above the fold" by providing a ``positions`` array encoded as follows:

::

    0
    0
    0
    1
    1
    0
    0
    0
    1
    ...

Where ``0 = "above the fold"`` and ``1 = "requires scrolling"``.
The specific value are not important, as long as they are consistent across all observations in the training data.
An encoding like ``100 = "above the fold"`` and ``17 = "requires scrolling"`` would result in exactly the same trained model.

In that way, ``positions`` in LightGBM's API are similar to a categorical feature.
Just as with non-ordinal categorical features, an integer representation is just used for memory and computational efficiency... LightGBM does not care about the absolute or relative magnitude of the values.

Unlike a categorical feature, however, ``positions`` are used to adjust the target to reduce the bias in predictions made by the trained model.
```

Alright @metpavel @shiyu1994 I think I'm understanding the points summarized in https://github.com/microsoft/LightGBM/pull/5929#issuecomment-1639175098 now!

To help others like me who might not be familiar with position bias in learning-to-rank, and to be sure I've understood correctly, will you please consider this rewording of this section?

Author: @jameslamb, you suggested a great rewording of that section with a nice use case scenario as an example. Thank you!

--------------------------------------------

-  Refer to `gcc Tips <./gcc-Tips.rst>`__.

Support for Position Bias Treatment
------------------------------------

Often the relevance labels provided in Learning-to-Rank taks might be derived from implicit user feedback (e.g., clicks) and therefore might be biased due to their position/location on the screen when having been presented to a user. 

> LightGBM uses an additional file to store positional data, like the following:

Reviewer 2: I've updated this to allow both a `.position` file or the `position` parameter in Python Dataset API.

::

    3
    4
    1
    ...

It means the position of the document from the first data row, when presented to a user, was encoded as ``3``, second was encoded as ``4``, and so on. 
A position could be any arbitrary integer number (not necessarily from a contiguous range) and could encode the presentation of an item even in complex layouts like 2D or consiting of several verticals (it is up to the LightGBM user to perform such encoding/mapping into integers).

The position file corresponds with training data file line by line, and has one position per line.

And if the name of training data file is ``train.txt``, the position file should be named as ``train.txt.position`` and placed in the same folder as the data file.
In this case, LightGBM will load the position file automatically if it exists.

> Also, you can include position column in your data file. Please refer to the ``position_column`` `parameter <#position_column>`__.

Author: Removed this for now.
